Add Getting started tutorials. (#2026)
prometheus/docs: content/docs/tutorials/getting_started.md

---
title: Getting Started with Prometheus
sort_rank: 1
---

# What is Prometheus ?

> Prometheus is a system monitoring and alerting system. It was opensourced by SoundCloud in 2012 and was incubated by Cloud Native Computing Foundation. Prometheus stores all the metrics data as time series, i.e metrics information is stored along with the timestamp at which it was recorded, optional key-value pairs called as labels can also be stored along with metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus is a system monitoring and alerting system. It was opensourced by SoundCloud in 2012 and is the second project both to join and to to graduate within Cloud Native Computing Foundation after Kubernetes. Prometheus stores all metrics data as time series, i.e metrics information is stored along with the timestamp at which it was recorded, optional key-value pairs called as labels can also be stored along with metrics.
```

# What are metrics and why is it important?

Metrics in layperson terms is a standard for measurement. What we want to measure depends from application to application. For a web server it can be request times, for a database it can be CPU usage or number of active connections etc.

Metrics play an important role in understanding why your application is working in a certain way. If you run a web application and someone comes up to you and says that the application is slow. You will need some information to find out what is happening with your application. For example the application can become slow when the number of requests are high. If you have the request count metric you can spot the reason and increase the number of servers to handle the heavy load. Whenever you are defining the metrics for your application you must put on your detective hat and ask this question **what all information will be important for me to debug if any issue occurs in my application?**

# Basic Architecture of Prometheus

> The basic components of Prometheus are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The basic components of a Prometheus setup are:
```

> The basic components of Prometheus are:

Author: ```suggestion
The basic components of Prometheus setup are:
```

- Prometheus Server (The server which scrapes and stores the metrics data).
- Instrumented Application which expose its metrics / Exporter which exposes metrics of another application.
- Alertmanager to raise alerts based on preset rules.

(Note: Apart from this Prometheus has push_gateway which is not covered here).

[![Architecture](/assets/tutorial/architecture.png)](/assets/tutorial/architecture.png)

Let's consider web server as an example application and we want to extract a certain metric like the number of API calls processed by the web server. So we add certain instrumentation code using the Prometheus client library and expose the metrics information. Now that our web server exposes its metrics we can configure Prometheus to scrape it. Now Prometheus is configured to fetch the metrics from the web server which is listening on xyz IP address port 7500 at a specific time interval, say, every minute.

At 11:00 PM when I make the server public for consumption, the application calculates the request count and exposes it, Prometheus simultaneously scrapes the count metric and stores the value as 0.

> By 11:01 PM one request is processed. The instrumentation logic in the server increments the count to 1. When Prometheus scrapes the metric the value of count is 1 now.
> 
> By 11:02 PM two more requests are processed and the request count is 1+2 = 3 now. Similarly metrics are scraped and stored.
> 
> The user can control the frequency at which metrics are scraped by Prometheus.
> 
> | Time Stamp | Request Count (metric) |
> | ---------- | ---------------------- |
> | 11:00 PM   | 0                      |
> | 11:01 PM   | 1                      |
> | 11:02 PM   | 3                      |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By 11:01:00 one request is processed. The instrumentation logic in the server increments the count to 1. When Prometheus scrapes the metric the value of count is 1 now.

By 11:02:00 two more requests are processed and the request count is 1+2 = 3 now. Similarly metrics are scraped and stored.

The user can control the frequency at which metrics are scraped by Prometheus.

| Time Stamp | Request Count (metric) |
| ---------- | ---------------------- |
| 11:00:00   | 0                      |
| 11:01:00   | 1                      |
| 11:02:00   | 3                      |
```

---
title: Getting Started with Prometheus
sort_rank: 1
---

> # What is prometheus ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# What is Prometheus ?
```

# What are metrics and why is it important?

Metrics in layperson terms is a standard for measurement. What we want to measure depends from application to application. For a web server it can be request times, for a database it can be CPU usage or number of active connections etc.

Metrics play an important role in understanding why your application is working in a certain way. If you run a web application and someone comes up to you and says that the application is slow. You will need some information to find out what is happening with your application. For example the application can become slow when the number of requests are high. If you have the request count metric you can spot the reason and increase the number of servers to handle the heavy load. Whenever you are defining the metrics for your application you must put on your detective hat and ask this question **what all information will be important for me to debug if any issue occurs in my application?**

# Basic Architecture of Prometheus

> The basic components of prometheus are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The basic components of Prometheus are:
```

- Prometheus Server (The server which scrapes and stores the metrics data).

> - Instrumented Application which expose its metrics / Exporter which exposes metrics of another application.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Instrumented Application which exposes its metrics, or
- Exporter which exposes metrics of another application.
```

Author: should this be separate?

Reviewer: as per call: Can also say "targets to be scraped, for example:"

> - Alert manager to raise alerts based on preset rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Alertmanager to raise alerts based on preset rules.
```

> (Note: Apart from this prometheus has push gateways which is not covered here).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Note: Apart from this Prometheus has push_gateway which is not covered here).
```

[![Architecture](/assets/tutorial/architecture.png)](/assets/tutorial/architecture.png)

> Let's consider web server as an example application and we want to extract a certain metric like the number of API calls processed by the web server. So we add certain instrumentation code using the prometheus client library and expose the metrics information. Now that our web server exposes its metrics we can configure prometheus to scrape it. Now Prometheus is configured to fetch the metrics from the web server which is listening on xyz IP address port 7500 at a specific time interval, say, every minute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider web server as an example application and we want to extract a certain metric like the number of API calls processed by the web server. So we add certain instrumentation code using the Prometheus client library and expose the metrics information. Now that our web server exposes its metrics we can configure Prometheus to scrape it. Now Prometheus is configured to fetch the metrics from the web server which is listening on xyz IP address port 7500 at a specific time interval, say, every minute.
```

> At 11:00 PM when I make the server public for consumption, the application calculates the request count and exposes it, Prometheus 
> simultaneously scrapes the count metric and stores the value as 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At 11:00 PM when I make the server public for consumption, the application calculates the request count and exposes it, Prometheus simultaneously scrapes the count metric and stores the value as 0.
```

> By 11:01 PM one request is processed. The instrumentation logic in the server increments the count to 1. When prometheus scraps the metric the value of count is 1 now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By 11:01 PM one request is processed. The instrumentation logic in the server increments the count to 1. When Prometheus scrapes the metric the value of count is 1 now.
```

By 11:02 PM two more requests are processed and the request count is 1+2 = 3 now. Similarly metrics are scraped and stored.

The user can control the frequency at which metrics are scraped by Prometheus.

| Time Stamp | Request Count (metric) |
| ---------- | ---------------------- |
| 11:00 PM   | 0                      |
| 11:01 PM   | 1                      |
| 11:02 PM   | 3                      |

> (Note: This table is just a representation for understanding purposes. Prometheus doesn’t store the values in the exact format)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Note: This table is just a representation for understanding purposes. Prometheus doesn’t store the values in this exact format)
```

> Prometheus also has a server which exposes the metrics which are stored by scraping. This server is used to query the metrics, create dashboards/charts on it etc. PromQL is used to query the metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prometheus also has an API which allows to query metrics which have been stored by scraping. This API is used to query the metrics, create dashboards/charts on it etc. PromQL is used to query these metrics.
```
